Programs read inputs from data sources (e.g., keyboard, file, network, memory buffer, or another program) and write outputs to data sinks (e.g., display console, file, network, memory buffer, or another program). In Java standard I/O, inputs and outputs are handled by the so-called streams. A stream is a sequential and contiguous one-way flow of data (just like water or oil flows through the pipe). It is important to mention that Java does not differentiate between the various types of data sources or sinks (e.g., file or network) in stream I/O. They are all treated as a sequential flow of data. Input and output streams can be established from/to any data source/sink, such as files, network, keyboard/console or another program. The Java program receives data from a source by opening an input stream, and sends data to a sink by opening an output stream. All Java I/O streams are one-way (except the RandomAccessFile, which will be discussed later). If your program needs to perform both input and output, you have to open two streams - an input stream and an output stream.

Stream I/O operations involve three steps:

Open an input/output stream associated with a physical device (e.g., file, network, console/keyboard), by constructing an appropriate I/O stream instance.
Read from the opened input stream until "end-of-stream" encountered, or write to the opened output stream (and optionally flush the buffered output).
Close the input/output stream.
Java's I/O operations is more complicated than C/C++ to support internationalization (i18n). Java internally stores characters (char type) in 16-bit UCS-2 character set. But the external data source/sink could store characters in other character set (e.g., US-ASCII, ISO-8859-x, UTF-8, UTF-16, and many others), in fixed length of 8-bit or 16-bit, or in variable length of 1 to 4 bytes. [Read "Character Sets and Encoding Schemes"]. As a consequence, Java needs to differentiate between byte-based I/O for processing raw bytes or binary data, and character-based I/O for processing texts made up of characters.

